Title: China’s Manufacturing Dominance: State Directives & Ruthless Competition — Arthur Kroeber
URL: https://api.substack.com/feed/podcast/166313955/a4bce04767cd0e7a53bdf85d3967e668.mp3
Published: Thu, 19 Jun 2025 16:03:16 GMT
Episode ID: 478e599ef5db918d64bf1c652d09106b

--- TRANSCRIPT ---

 Today I'm interviewing Arthur Crower, who is the founder of Gav College Reconomics, which is a resource consultancy focused on China, and author of China's economy, what everybody needs to know, a friend while I was in China recommended it to me, and it's been the most valuable and useful resource that you can get today on how China works. So Arthur, thanks for coming on the podcast and taking the time to chat with me. It's great to be here, thanks. First question, what really is the problem if China becomes as wealthy, or if its economy grows as big as America's, or grows even bigger? I know maybe it's not your perspective to be a China hawk, but I've never really understood why this is a problem in the first place. Yeah, it's a very good question. It's a very good question. There's a lot of criticism of China from the standpoint of, okay, you're trying to get rich, that's fine, okay, but you're basically trying to get rich on the backs of everyone else in the world by running this gigantic, manufacturing export machine, where it seems like the Chinese ambition is to produce all the manufactured goods in the world for everyone, run in enormous trade surplus, which means that they are depending on other people's buying power to support them, and that this is basically not fair, not sustainable, not a stable way to participate in the global economy. So that's more of a question, not if China does get rich, but how does it get rich? Does it get rich by essentially operating on the same rules as everyone else and having a market that other people can participate in, or does it grow rich by essentially making it impossible for anyone else in the world to have the kind of production structures that they want to have and relying entirely on these ever growing trade surpluses. In general, in principle, from a welfare standpoint, it would be great if China got to be as rich as everywhere else in the world, even as rich as America, but that is likely to have some pretty difficult and destabilizing political consequences because of the vast differences between the Chinese political system and the US political system and the political systems of all the other major industrialized countries. I mean, the trade surplus point to the extent it is made possible by the government involvement in industry, which is actually not even clear to me that that's the case. I mean, just like if you have high savings and not enough investment domestically, just like the counting identities are just that you will have a trade surplus. But suppose that's even the case, on paper, it just seems like what is happening, the Chinese taxpayer, the Chinese saver, is like subsidizing foreign importers. So on paper, it just seems like we're getting a good deal. I'm sure some people are upset about this, specifically people who manufacture outside of China. But it's certainly not like something obviously insidious. And so it seems like if it wasn't for this, there would be some other reason that China can't grow as altias as. And I am playing a low-bozadric here, but I just like, I don't really understand why this is like such a big issue that there needs to be a great power competition about it. I think there are a couple of things beneath that. One is the systemic difference politically is really important. So the US self-identity is of the leader of democracies around the world. And we are very invested at least for now in our democratic system. We'll see how that evolves over the next two or three years. There's some question marks around that. But historically, that's been a really huge part of the US identity. And basically the morality play of World War II and the Cold War, which has really been the crucible in which US foreign policy has been formed, is that you had an alliance of democracies that fought back first against fascism, then against communism, they won. And the result was that you created a world where most major countries were democratically operated on market economic systems, and we were heading towards sort of a world of convergence of systems where everyone is essentially playing by the same rules. And China really gets in the way of that narrative, because it is an incredibly successful authoritarian system where the ruling party still calls itself communist. US elites have never to this day really gotten comfortable with the idea that the Chinese political system is legitimate. And as long as you have that underlying problem, I think it's going to be very difficult to erase these difficulties. And then on the economic side, I think it is a problem, the way that China has chosen to organize its economy. Yeah, in a strictly financial sense, if you will, the rest of the world comes out ahead, in the sense that China is willing to subsidize a lot of low cost production. So the rest of the world gets a lot of cheap goods and the overall welfare of the world improves a lot. I think that's clearly true. But I think if you look at what has happened to the US politically over the last 20 years, there are a lot of flies in that ointment. And the fly is that it is important for large countries to be able to maintain a diversified production structure and maintain kind of social cohesion. And if you lose the capacity to run a manufacturing economy that employs large numbers of people, there's a lot of disruptions that come as a result of that. And the purely financialized economy that we had grew up in the United States in the early 2000s as a result of this bargain with China wound up being pretty bad for the social compact. So I think there is a legitimate question about how do you integrate China's growing power wealth industrial might into a world in a way that societies around the world can tolerate. And it's a legitimately difficult problem. And I think a lot of the problems have to do not with China but with US domestic policy. So I think a lot of what's going on right now is scapegoating of China as a way of diverting attention from decisions that need to be made domestically about income redistribution and macroeconomic policy and so forth. But there is also, I think, a legitimate question to be made about China now accounts for 20% of the global economy probably will be larger in future. A third of the global manufacturing economy there has to be an agreed set of rules about how it interacts with the rest of the world so that everyone feels that they are benefiting not just in financial terms. And we don't really have that agreement now. Okay, so two points on the political system. I wonder if we've learned a bad example from World War II and the Cold War, which is that the way in which great power conflict culminates is that the other person totally collapses. Right. I think that was actually necessary obviously for Hitler and even for the Soviet Union, I think they were evil regimes. I think China today isn't evil regime in a way but it's just not in the same order as Stalin or Hitler. And so the end state for any great power competition for America history is long, right? So there will be more than just these in the X-ray decades. Cannot be that if there's a different political system that it has to collapse the way that the Soviet Union collapsed or that Hitler collapsed. And then there's a question about regardless of their political system, there's this economic dislocation. I mean, the first thing you note there is this could be true of any country. So I think people can play these two arguments whereas it's worth noticing that Australia was like producing everything the world consumed and had economy the size of America is. These arguments should apply to them as well and I don't think people have this sense of, well, if Australia's producing a bunch of stuff for us, we need to form a coalition against them and have this adversarial attitude. But suppose we did. I think there's a question of, okay, how could you prevent this dislocation and is there Australia's fault? The analogy is breaking down. So let me just go back to China. Right? Right? So there's low value ad manufacturing where labor cost is a big fraction of cost and that kind of stuff was shipped off to China. But if it wasn't for China, there's many other countries in the world that have much lower labor costs than the US. So if it wasn't for China, it'd be in Vietnam or Bangladesh or something. And then there's a high-tech manufacturing. But there, I haven't crunched the numbers but I don't know if I already guess. I don't think TSMCs leading edge, like what it cost to make a five-nanometer wafer. I'm guessing very little of that is like the process engineers themselves. And that is just like, can your country produce it? Yeah, well, there's a few different questions in there. So let me break that down. So first, I think the first thing that you alluded to there is essentially is a cold war, the right framing for whatever this conflict is that we have with China. And my answer to that is absolutely not. And you can address that question both empirically and conceptually. So empirically, if you just look at patterns of trade and investment during the Cold War, the actual Cold War with Russia, the Soviet Union, the Soviet Union never accounted for more than about 1% of US trade and investment flows were basically nonexistent. China at its peak about 10 years ago accounted for 17% of US trade, which is about the same amount as Japan did in the late 80s and early 90s. And that number has come down a little bit on the surface, but when you take account of stuff from China coming in through third countries and so forth, basically that remains the same. So it's just, and then if you talk about investment flows, there's $600 billion or more of US corporate investment in China, which generates huge amounts of sales much larger than US exports to China. So the integration of the two economies is just extraordinary. There's basically no precedent for it at any point in economic history. And it is just a completely different order of magnitude to what was going on during the Cold War. So one question would be is like, OK, if you really want a Cold War, does that mean that what you want to do is you want to reduce those trade and investment flows back down to essentially zero? And if so, how do you do that? So that's a very difficult problem. But I think you got at sort of the more core conceptual issue, which is how does this end? This does not end by trying to going away or turning it to something completely different. It's too big. It is too successful. The economic model is successful on its own terms. It has a lot of problems, but it's fundamentally successful. And it is deeply integrated with the entire global economy in ways that are beneficial for China and beneficial for most of the other countries in the world. So everyone has some sort of a stake in China continuing to succeed. And so this is just not going to go away. And the other way, the other sense in which it's not going to go away is let's say you could wave a magic wand and make the Communist Party of China disappear tomorrow and replace it with something else. What would that something else look like? Well, if that something else were to be successful at governing China, it would almost certainly share many of the characteristics of the Chinese Communist Party. It would have a strong determination for China to be an independent geopolitical actor, taking care of its own security with very strong militaries so that it could defend itself against all of its real and perceived security threats. It would be committed as every Chinese government since the mid 19th century has been to maximizing the rate of technological progress and making sure that as much as possible of China's core technology needs were met by domestic production rather than imports. It would be very, very similar to what we have today. So it's a fantasy to think that what we have a problem here is just this particular regime. And you can just like get them to change their minds. No, the Chinese approach on this has been, is very deeply rooted in both the institutional cultural history of China itself and its position, its geographical and geopolitical position in the world. And so it's going to have interests that create a lot of friction and conflict with the perceived interests of the United States under any government. And it's probably going to be quite successful at managing its economy because they've been very successful for many, many decades. When I was in China, I asked somebody I met, what would happen if there was an election in China tomorrow? And his answer was that it's possible that the median voter in China is much more reactionary than the government, right? Yes, yes. In fact, this might be much more liberal than the regime you would get out of a democratic election. You know, we don't know for sure because there really is a reliable public polling. But a lot of people say that and my perception is that that could well be true, that there is a lot. And all you have to do is look at the Chinese internet, the blogosphere, they don't have Twitter, but they have local equivalents. There is a lot of unfettered nationalist highly militaristic thinking there that the government spends most of its time keeping in check. Every so often, they sort of unleash it because they're in a spat with Japan or whoever, and they need to join a popular opinion. But mostly, they try and tamp that down. So a fully, you know, a Chinese system that was fully representative of actual, you know, popular views, we don't know exactly what that might be, but it could be very, very difficult to deal with. Going back to this discussion about, well, what should the Grand Vagan between the rest of the world and China be? I live in Silicon Valley, and as you know, a big topic of conversation is AI, in particular, the race between China and US on AI. And one idea I've heard is that what we should do is give them free reign on solar and electric vehicles, batteries, all of this other like real world heavy manufacturing that they seem more, they seem to have greater proclivity for anyways, that they consider more real, right? And then say on AI and semiconductor as well, look, this we want to dominate, everything else will import, is this a plausible deal worth making? Because I think, right, if you take AI very seriously, this might be just like an amazing bargain. Yeah, I mean, I think the question is like, you can say what you want in your sort of ideal state of things, but then how do you get there? Because, you know, there are a lot of people in China who would say, well, no, we want it all, and we can, so why should we make that deal with you? Right. So if I take this down basically to the level on which the United States and China are now starting to negotiate, right? My personal view on this would be that it would make a lot of sense for the US to be much, much more open to a direct investment by Chinese companies in manufacturing in the United States. And I'm thinking, you know, particularly things like electric vehicles, that whole supply chain, green energy, industrial automation, all of those things. Why do I think that? Well, first of all, I think if the US is serious about revitalizing its industrial base, and I think there's a good case for trying to do that selectively, it is not going to happen unless you invite in the world's leading players and have them compete. That is how China industrialized, you know, 45 years ago they were an industrial basket case, basically. They said, we want to get industrially strong. How do we do that? We get all the leading companies in the world to invest here, and we will learn from them. And that's how you do it. So if we're serious about that, we should be serious about figuring out ways that we can bring Chinese industrial investment into the United States. And that, to me, it would be a win-win because Chinese companies at an individual level would love that. They see the US as a huge market. They can't get into it right now. They would love the opportunity to tap into it more. We could learn from them. And if you did that, basically you would be saying, whatever we're in with China, it's not a cold war. Because we are willing to have high levels of direct investment by both sides. And you might want to put protections around that, all kinds of rules of the road. But in an ideal world, I think we would have a lot more of that. Now, first question is like, why is that so difficult? Why do you essentially have a consensus in Washington that not only do we have to prevent the export of US technology goods to China, but we also have to prevent Chinese companies from investing in the US. This is basically agreed on in Washington. And the reason is data. Fundamentally, there is a view that any manufacturing process today is also a data creation machine. And where does that data go? And who benefits from that data? And the other thing is that it used to be back 30 or 40 years ago you could divide the world into most technologies, which were essentially for civilian use, a few technologies that were military. And then a very, very small proportion of technologies, dual-use technologies that could go either way. And it was those dual-use technologies that had to be controlled very carefully. Now, basically, everything is dual use. Any technology that you can imagine can be put to some kind of military use. So it becomes much more risky to have these patterns of investment, particularly when you don't know where the data is flowing and how that will feed into someone else's defense production base. And I think that is a legitimate concern. And so in my ideal world, you would have a lot more Chinese investment in the United States, but it would be very carefully regulated. In the same way, the China very carefully regulates the direct investments by foreign companies. In its economy, they have very strict rules about data localization, et cetera, et cetera. So I think that could be achieved. I think it will be very, very difficult in the current political environment. And then just in terms of the sort of the grand bargain that you suggest is, China is very interested in not being pigeonholed. They didn't want to be pigeonholed in low value added manufacturing. They wanted to do the high tech stuff. Now they're doing that. They don't want to be pigeonholed in manufacturing. They want all of technology, including AI. So I don't think that any strategy, which is premised on the idea that China should accept arbitrary limits on what it can do, is viable. Because would we accept that? Absolutely not. And so why should we expect them to accept something that we would consider an absurd and completely unreasonable infringement on our sovereignty? It just doesn't work that way. Publicly available data is running out. So major AI labs like Meta, Google DeepMind, and OpenAI, all partner with scale to push the boundaries of what's possible. Through scales data foundry, major labs get access to high quality data to fuel post training, including advanced reasoning capabilities. Scales research team seal is creating the foundations for integrating advanced AI into society through practical AI safety frameworks and public leaderboards around safety and alignment. Their latest leaderboards include humanities loss exam, enigma eval, multi-challenge, and vista, which test a range of capabilities from expert level reasoning to multimodal puzzle solving to performance on multi-turn conversations. Scale also just released scale evaluation, which helps diagnose model limitations, leading frontier model developers rely on scale evaluation to improve the reasoning capabilities of their best models. If you're an AI researcher or engineer, and you want to learn more about how scales data foundry and research lab can help you go beyond the current frontier capabilities, go to scale.com slash the workache. It's funny because one of the main arguments that China hawks will make, or one of the big parts of the world view, is that China really cheated us by our companies would invest in China, build up factories in China, the technology would get transferred there, and this was like a huge arbitrage that China was able to pull. And so if you actually believe that, it should just make the reverse of that incredibly compelling because you get a chance to do that again. Do you want to tell the story of BYD and Tesla in 2018 and 2019? Because I think this really illustrates the point or what could be done in reverse very well. So if you go back to the early 1990s, China recognized that pretty much every other country that had gotten rich had done so in large part by building up an automotive industry that then served as a mechanism for creating innovations in other sectors. You look at the US, you look at Germany, you look at Japan, you look even at Korea, which is very successful. So they said, okay, we have to have a big auto industry. This is one of the key industries that we have to support. So starting the early 1990s, they had this strategy of bringing in foreign companies, making them do joint ventures in a 50-50 basis with Chinese auto companies. And the theory was that eventually the Chinese companies would learn and then you would be able to develop your own national champion auto companies and kick the foreigners out. And basically this failed. It failed massively. Over the next 25 years, foreign companies came in, General Motors, VW, Toyota, Honda, and so forth. And they did very, very well. And the joint venture partners in China basically just sat around and clipped coupons from the dividends that these companies, that these joint ventures were producing. All of the technological inputs continuously came from the foreign partners. All of the design ideas that the local partners would never able to succeed. And in volume terms, you had a lot of smaller scale, locally sponsored vehicle companies in China, building kind of low-end vehicles. So a lot of the cars that wound up getting made in China were made by local firms. But if you look at the share of profits and total value in the system, it was dominated by these joint ventures which were in turn dominated by the foreign partners. So China, circa 2010, 2015, had been doing this for 25 years. And they were basically no closer to having globally competitive conventional car makers than they had been 25 years before. So in the late 2000s, 2005, 2010, they started thinking, well, this and other related kind of industrial policies are not working very well. We are not generating the national champions that we thought we were gonna do. So what do we do about this? And their answer was leapfrog. Let's try and figure out what is the next stage of technological development that people really aren't working on yet. Let's work on that and then maybe we can get in on the ground floor. And so what they came up with in large measure was a renewable energy, specifically electric vehicles. So they started having a pretty comprehensive set of subsidies and other kinds of industrial support for companies like BYD to produce electric vehicles. BYD is basically a private company. This worked okay for 10 or 12 years. And BYD got pretty good. And particularly what they started to figure out was the supply chain. So they got very good at making the batteries. But still, when you got to 2018, 2019, BYD was still not that exciting a company. Most people in China really didn't want to buy electric vehicles. They seemed really inconvenient. The sexy cars were like the big SUVs that the joint ventures were putting out and so forth. And then in 2018, Chinese government made the decision that they would allow Tesla to come in and build a wholly owned gigafactory in Shanghai. They had never approved a wholly owned automotive company before. They started cranking out cars in 2019, which became immensely popular. And it seems like one of the things that happened was that the Chinese companies BYD 2019 had gotten pretty good at the underlying technology of electric cars, specifically the batteries and then the software systems that covered the cars. But they were terrible at consumer design. They had not figured out how to make these appealing products that people would want to buy. And Tesla did have appealing products that people wanted to buy. They were big status symbols. So BYD and its competitors said, OK, this is the part we have to figure out. How do we achieve this? And basically, they recognized that they had to up their design game. They, among other things, went to Germany and loaded up on a lot of German car designers that were able to transform their technology base into much more appealing packages. And then by 2022 or so, they were able to compete with Tesla both on price and on quality. So I think what that shows you is that number one, the Chinese government made a pretty good bet on this leapfrogging idea that there are technologies of the future. We need to get in early, subsidize the heck out of them. Some of the estimates that have been made about the level of subsidies given to the EV industry and related supply chains, it's $2 or $300 billion. Huge huge amounts of money that did not generate that much of a return, financial return, for a really long time. But they stuck at it. And then the thing that finally flipped the switch was this catalytic foreign investment that showed the Chinese companies what they needed to do to actually compete in the consumer market. And then they got very good at that very quickly. How much was the $200, $300 billion actually relevant to given the fact that BYD, as you mentioned, is a private company? Yep. Was that all, like how much of that was actually necessary or counterfactually important to creating this outcome? I think the thing is, it's like the old slogan about advertising half of it works, but you don't know which half. Yeah, the Chinese need to spend that much in subsidies, probably not, right? But had they spent less, would they have they had the same effect? Maybe, maybe not. They tried various different types of subsidies. So initially, they were producer subsidies to just like get companies to produce more. Then they had a lot of buyer subsidies. So at the individual level, but also the city government level to promote things like electric buses. And so I think all of that played a role. And I think what was important was that the government set a very clear direction. And they said, we want this to happen. And we really want it. And we don't know how long it's gonna take. And we're just gonna keep trying different things until it works, because the goal of creating this electric vehicle sector and the whole supply chain for it, that's what we want at the end. And why are they able to identify these kinds of sectors in advance? Because I don't know, central planning isn't supposed to work, right? So, and there's been many cases of countries which have tried to do this. Germany, Germany, Japan. Many other countries missed out on the internet because there was a centrally directed effort towards these heavy industries or manufacturing, which actually turned out not to be relevant in the 21st century. Yeah, no, it's definitely perilous. So if you look at, China has a list of key industries. It's called the strategic emerging industries. They came up with it basically in 2010. It built on previous iterations of industrial policy. Most of it is not really an effort to predict with high degree of specificity what comes next. They're mostly pretty obvious things, like semiconductors, industrial automation, new materials, all this kind of stuff, that I think would be on anyone's list if you were just sort of running a VC fund and saying what are the sectors that we think are? But most VC funds are like losing money. And so it actually is like maybe like a couple of firms in the world which are able to make this direction correctly. Yeah. So it's like a couple firms in the world plus the Ministry of Information and Technology in China are the only people who can predict the future. I don't know. I mean, I think basically the analogy with the VC fund is a pretty good one. I've made it many times. Think of China as like a giant VC fund that is just willing to lose huge amounts of money for a really long time on the assumption that a few of the bets will pan out. Right? And so China as a state, as a government, is uniquely able to throw a lot of money at things for a really long time. Not care about what the returns are and say we're going to identify this universe of potential winners. We're going to promote all of them basically. And some of them may work and some of them may not. And the successes will pay for the failures. I guess I'm still confused on why many other countries have tried similar things. Like Niti was a Japanese version of this, right? Yeah. And look at their economy now and their high tax sector. So a couple things. So first of all, I would say that even if you go back to like 2005, 2006, when they started thinking about this, saying that green energy was going to be an important industry in the future, everyone was saying that, right? You had the Kleiner Perkins guy, John Doerr. John Doerr was the big VC who said, circuit 2007, I'm going to put all of my bets on green energy because this is the future, right? He turned out to be wrong from the standpoint of his investment returns. But he turned out to be, I think totally correct in terms of saying this is a really big thing. So it was just not that wild the bet to say that green energy is going to be really important. And so we should place a lot of bets on that. So, but why does this work and why is this different from a central planning thing, right? I think that's a really important point. So, a couple things. So, first of all, the Chinese system like the systems that preceded it in East Asia, Japan, Korea, Taiwan, and so forth has always put a lot of emphasis on being good at exporting. So, there are a lot of pressures within the system to create industries that can export, right? The reason this is important is if you have a totally closed system, which frankly is what I think Donald Trump is trying to create in the United States. And people are just producing essentially for domestic consumption. There's no incentive to keep up with global technology developments. So, if you have this constant export focus, essentially what everyone is trying to do, if you close domestic market, you can rig the domestic market and buy off your connections in government to make sure that you as a company have your market share. So, there are a lot of ways to win that do not involve technological upgrading. And that is what doom's all import substitution regimes. If you have an export-driven economy, you can't rig the global economy, ultimately you have to compete, right? And you can't compete just on price, you have to compete on raising your game. And Japan did this successfully, Taiwan did this successfully, Korea did this successfully, China has done that successfully. So, that's answer one is that you had this underlying system which was heavily incentivized in technological upgrading across the board. So, that's what you were sitting on top of. And that was completely different than the old central planning regime, which was autarkic and inward looking. Second, you had this domestic competition environment, which was really cutthroat, and which involved a lot of international companies, right? And this is a little bit of a difference to Japan, which always kept the foreign companies out of its domestic market. Their companies operated globally very, very well, but the domestic market was very protected. China's domestic market was not that protected. And so, they were always willing to bring in companies that they thought would be able to spark some technological change. And again, you can say, so what this did is it created a field in which maybe the government has the right ideas, maybe they don't, but you have a crucible in which their ideas can be tested. Very competitive domestic market, where you have a lot of the big international players doing their own thing as well. And so, the things that work get some validation and you can keep building on those successes. So, I think that's a really important, and then just the sheer scale at which they were able and willing to support what appeared to be losing bets for a long time does matter. And you could contrast their view, for example, on solar energy where they said, look, we want to be big in solar energy. And again, they started thinking about this in 2005. What do we need to do? So, they identified the whole supply chain from the, you know, the Ross-Illican inputs through all of the modules and to the finished panels. And they said, we want to be in every stage of that. So, they had a pretty deliberate strategy of trying to create people at every point in the supply chain. And they were willing to go through cycles of not people not making any money. Comparison obviously in the United States is the US government gives one loan to one company, Selindra, it goes bad. And everyone says, this is proof that industrial policy does not work, right? And I think China actually has the right answer to that question and we had the wrong answer to that question. You have to be willing to accept some failures and some loss of, you know, government money along the way if you want to get to the end. But I really stress the ecosystem because a lot of this would not have worked just by the government saying, oh, we want to do solar. It would not have worked unless you had this broader ecosystem of export-driven manufacturing, high competition, and international participation across many, many, many, many, many sectors. Of the economy, they all converged to create a successful result. I want to put some of these bureaucrats in a factorial speeder on and see how they do. Ellen Lentokins are expensive. So if you're building an AI tool, free trials of your product cost you real money. And this is what worth it if you're serving actual users. But if it's all going to bot signups, then it's actually a real notable waste. Costco can hand out free samples, but not if the whole store is overrun with backgrounds. Unfortunately, AI products are the biggest targets for free-tier abuse because these AIs can be used for anything. There's crazy stories about people making free accounts on cursor and then piggybacking off these API credits to generate fanfic. So what can you do? Well, you can't just put your entire product behind a paywall from the very beginning. This is where Work OS Radar comes in. Radar blocks free trial of use by distinguishing between real prospective users and malicious bots so that you can keep offering free trials without wasting a bunch of money in the process. Cursor recently turned on Radar to make sure that their free trials were in being used to generate random fanfic. Radar currently runs millions of checks for them every single week. You can learn more at workOS.com slash Radar. All right, back to Arthur. I just heard you read Ken Rogoff, so Japan's top of mind for me. That's really interesting that even though Japan had this export discipline, maybe the reason that the growth was going to continue after the 80s is because you had this, was the convoy system where banks were incentivized to lend to people they knew in these conglomerates. And these conglomerates had been around for decades, even before World War II. Right. Now, a question I have about China is now that you do have these companies which have become national champions. Right. And our conglomerates, right, the same company is producing my phone and the car and everything in between. And given this sort of like intrinsic nature of maybe authoritarian systems or systems with financial repression. And will we return to, or I don't know if we're turns right word, will we go to a system that is closer to what Japan had in the 80s where, okay, now you're going to give money to Huawei because Huawei are the people or BWD are the people. Or will it remain dynamic, especially in the sectors which are coming up over the next few decades? No, it's a good question. I guess I would start by emphasizing the ways in which China is very, very different than Japan. The sort of central thing that is really different that lies at the root of a lot of this is that China is an independent geopolitical actor in Japan was not. Japan at the end of the day, they could rely on the US for security. They were demilitarized. China basically is on its own during a very dangerous neighborhood. They have 14 land neighbors that they share borders with. They have names like North Korea, Russia, Pakistan, Afghanistan. A lot of dangerous actors. Several of them have nuclear weapons, North Korea, Russia, Pakistan, and India. China, just in a very narrow sense, lives in a very dangerous neighborhood. They, quite legitimately, have, I think, some pretty significant national security needs. They also have aspirations to be great power and they want to do it on their own. So the incentive to get things right is much more existential in China than it was in Japan. Japan essentially could take the choice to sort of say, oh, well, we're going to have a stagnant economy and that's bad and whatever. But actually we'll be fine. And for China, it's not fine. So there is underlying it, I think there's a spur that increases the chances that the Chinese leaders will do the things that they need to do to keep the system more dynamic. It's not a guarantee, but it's a pretty strong incentive. But then if you look at some of the specifics, so the big difference between the way that China and Japan are economically organized is essentially the relationship between the financial and the corporate sector. But Japan had the system where banks owned equity in these industrial companies and in the trading companies and vice versa. There were these cross share holdings, which meant that essentially the entire economy of Japan, the entire corporate and financial sector had one big balance sheet. And all of that balance sheet rested by the late 1980s on land values that had just gotten completely detached from any form of reality. There was an investment thesis among investors who were playing the Japanese stock market in the late 80s that you did not look at the earnings of the Japanese companies. Those were irrelevant. What I looked at was the value of the land that they controlled. So it was essentially a capital ratio where you assumed that the value of their underlying land capital was a permanent contribution to their wealth and prosperity. And so the valuations of these stocks, which got, again, crazy, you couldn't justify them by earnings, they say, well, it doesn't matter because the land that they're sitting on is so valuable. The stock values collapsed by 80%. The stock values had to collapsed by a similar amount, 80%. And everyone was holding shares in one another. So the banks, their capital got eroded because a lot of their capital was tied up in the land and in the stocks, which were collateralized by land. And so they were unable to lend. They just had to deliver just as fast as possible. The companies had to deliver as fast as possible. And so the entire economy got engulfed by this phenomenon of debt deflation, which basically means that in the act of paying down the debt, because you're doing fire sales of assets, you're reducing the prices of those assets, introducing deflation. So the real value of your debt continues to grow even as you are supposedly reducing it because it's a deflationary effect. It was very, very difficult to get out. China does not have this problem at all because they looked at the problems that Japan got into. They looked at similar problems that Korea had in the late 1990s and they said, we will never allow this kind of cross-sharrowing between financial companies and corporations. This is way too dangerous. So they have kept the two quarantined. It is illegal for industrial companies to own a bank. They are allowed, the bigger ones are allowed to have internal financing subsidiaries, but they can only sort of manage financing flows within the group. And it is also illegal for banks to load up on shares of industrial companies. So you have a distinct financial system and industrial system, which means that the particular type of macro problem that Japan got into is very, very unlikely to occur in China today. So you have huge debt problems. So the property developers very over leveraged huge problem. You've had a massive property crash in China for the last five years. That is a big, big problem. You have local governments that borrowed a lot of money, invested in infrastructure, which is now delivering very little returns. They have a big debt problem. So you have very substantial debt problems in China that have significant negative macro consequences, but they are all isolated. They can be dealt with in sort of one by one. If you look at the industrial sector, it is not very highly leveraged. That level is in fact or not high. Most private companies in China have learned from many years. They couldn't get access to bank credit because the banks only wanted to lend to state owned enterprises, which were a secure, they had physical collateral and they had a state guarantee. The private companies for years have learned to make do basically financing their investment out of retained earnings and their leveraged ratios are not that high. They are creeping up now over the last few years because of the big industrial policy push. But fundamentally, they are in a very different position than the Japanese companies were. This is just stuff from your book that I am setting back to you, but you talk about these local government financing vehicles, which are backed. The local government takes out a lot of loans in order to build this infrastructure. That is backed by the presumed appreciation of the land which should go up as the infrastructure goes up. That sounds very similar to the problem you are describing with Japan. While you say, look, this is debt that is on the local government balance sheets. But fundamentally, I don't know, it is like one country. Especially if you have this system of the government can just hand the debt to somebody. How immune is the private economy really from, will it just take down the local government and then nobody will make a fuss and these other companies will just never have to hear about it again? I guess my view on this is that this local government land-based financing model was actually a pretty smart thing to do initially. It was a decade or so. It worked quite well. Local governments were sitting on a lot of these land assets. It was perfectly the land assets originally were undervalued quite substantially. It made sense for the local governments essentially to try and capitalize some of the future value of these things and use them to finance infrastructure development. This was not a rogue policy that local governments came up with on their own. It was actually sponsored by the central government and the China Development Bank back in the early 2000s, which was grappling with the problem that China at that point had a severe shortage of housing and infrastructure of all kinds including urban infrastructure. The question was like, we need a lot more of this stuff. How do we build it? How do we finance it? They realized, oh, actually as we build this stuff out, the values of this land are going to skyrocket. So essentially take some financing against that future land price appreciation and use that to build the infrastructure that makes everything possible. If you look at the first few cases of where this was done in the early 2000s, they had these estimates of what the land would ultimately be worth that seemed ridiculous and astronomical at the time. They were in fact way too low. They were way, way conservative on what the actual land price appreciation would be. So you had a period of about eight or nine years where essentially the development banks, the statement development banks were doing this in a fairly controlled way, very, very successfully. And then what happened was that after the 2008 financial crisis, the government said, oh, we just like have to spend a lot of money to gin up growth because there's been this global economic catastrophe. And so they did a massive cash infusion into the banks and to the state on enterprise that said spend, spend, spend and basically all infrastructure is good infrastructure, just like build whatever you want. And so what happened at that point was that all of the commercial banks got into this business of lending money to local governments for these infrastructure projects. And their underwriting standards were much less robust than the China development banks had been. And so the local governments just, you know, it was free money to them. So they just like took all the money and they ran with it. And then that created this kind of Frankenstein's monster. Even so, I think you had quite a lot of that money in the first few years went into, you know, probably generated pretty good return because China was still underbuilt relative to what it needed to be. But after that had run for three or four years, it became clear that a lot of this was going into wasteful projects and it didn't live a good return. And now they've been struggling for the last decade to, for you how to unwind that. But I think it's important to understand that the underlying model was actually an OK model. It just wound up being done in a way that was completely un, uncoordinated and excessive and led to a lot of, you didn't have inside of structures that enable local governments to, you know, rein it in when they needed to. So I still think that that is fundamentally that that is a local government fiscal problem, which ultimately is a central government fiscal problem. If you look at the consolidated balance sheet of the central and local governments put them all together. China's government debt is still probably less as a share of GDP than US federal government debt. Right. US is over 100% China is probably under 100%. So my previous guest, Victor, she, I think estimated that the local government debt alone is somewhere between 150% of GDP. Yeah. And you add up to the central government debt. And I think you estimated that government debt in China is 200% of GDP. I would, yeah, I would respectfully disagree with with Victor on that. I mean, it's, it's impossible to know for sure. And the problem is that you have the problem of formal debt, which is debt issued by, you know, government entities. And then you have contingent debt, which is debt issued by corporations that may or may not essentially be fronts or windows for local governments. Right. There is also a very significant problem of double counting, which is, which is hard to resolve where, you know, debt gets counted at different levels in the system. It's, it's one piece of debt, but depending on how long the chain is, it gets counted in various different places. And I've long had the view that many of these much larger estimates of debt don't fully account for the double counting problem. So, you know, I, you know, I think it's, it's quite possible that the true debt level is higher than, you know, what we, what we think it is. It's unlikely, in my opinion, to be as high as, as Victor says it is. And it also matters, you know, what the debt goes to and who is actually formally responsible for paying it, you know, and are there like project flows or income flows that can be used to pay for it. So the servicing, just what the structure of the servicing the debt matters, right. At the end of the day, we do have a pretty good sense from the macro data of how much total debt there is in the economy. It's on the order of 300% of GDP. So if you want to say that the government debt is 200% of GDP, then unless you're double counting, you're basically saying that everything else is a lot less than we think it is. And do we know what the total debt private and public is in the US? Yeah, I don't have it off the top of my head. The federal government debt, I think, is around 110% of GDP, something like that. Total gross debt of all sectors, government corporations, households, I think would be on the order of around 300% of GDP. In Japan, it's substantially higher. You can get into an endless debate on these things where it becomes kind of a numbers game. But I have a pretty high conviction that China has a, they have a significant macro leverage issue. So if you look, if you take my numbers and say, well, gross debt to GDP, which by the way, are the official numbers of the Chinese government and largely accepted, you know, with some structural modifications by the IMF and so forth, 300% of GDP, that is in the ballpark for highly developed economies, right. It is extremely high for middle income economy. So if you look at China as an economy that has average per capita income, that's kind of like Brazil, one of these countries, China is way more leveraged than any other country of its level of income. And that is, that is potentially a problem. So I don't want to make a light of the problem because I think it is quite serious and it's, it's an important constraint on policy and it is an important constraint on growth at the moment. I don't think that it leads to a financial collapse situation because the system is contained and all the debt is denominated in local currencies. But it imposes attacks on growth and it is one of the things that makes China's growth more sluggish now than it probably could be. Why is it the case that middle-unton countries are especially in a bad position with having a high debt to GDP ratio because you would think naively that right there in a position to have higher growth over coming years. And so it makes sense for them to take more debt so they can use that to finance the greater growth that will come. At least theoretically assuming they use it to invest in high return things as opposed to the US or Japan where you're just going to be stuck with this debt loather a long time. Yeah, I think one of the things that you could say about that historically in China was that it, you know, it tended in general to finance productive assets. So whether it was industrial production or infrastructure for many many years China was a very infrastructure short country relative to its, you know, its needs. And so you could justify, you know, quite substantial debt financed infrastructure investments on the basis that these will deliver, you know, good economic returns for many decades into the future. The case for that is a lot weaker now than it was before. The problem is, you know, how do you essentially retire this enormous stock of very low productivity infrastructure investments, debt financed and how do you, how do you sort of move on and have more productive return on capital in future. And there, there are ways from solving that problem to me, the fundamental issue is they have too much of a supply side strategy, not enough of the demand side strategy, right. It's really a macroeconomic issue that if they had stronger domestic demand, that would generate more profits for companies. They would be able to more pricing power for companies. You would get a little bit of inflation. So you would have more cash flows within the economies that would enable people to and local governments to pay down debt. You know, a little bit of inflation would erode the real value of the debt. And that's essentially how they got out of their last debt problem in the late 1990s. They had gigantic bad debts in the banking system, essentially representing legacy loans to stay on enterprises. They had no way of paying them back. And they had a very, very growth friendly program that generated a lot of growth, a lot of inflation and that basically strengthened the debt problem. And what they need now is a revamped updated version of that strategy where they do a lot more to promote domestic demand, to get more profits, more cash flows, and a little bit more inflation into the system. And that would probably solve the debt problem over a decade or two. All right, look at this. This is just part of an O1 visa application. Lighthouse will handle all of this for you. Earlier this year, I wanted to hire somebody who lives in the UK to come work with me full time in San Francisco. He's incredibly talented, but he's had a very non-linear career trajectory. Because of this, we didn't even know where to begin when it came to immigration. Lighthouse laid out all the options and helped us understand what was possible. After we decided to pursue the O1 visa, they navigated this whole insane, convoluted process for us. It was shockingly easy on our end. This experience also showed me that for people working on ambitious technical problems like AI, robotics, synthetic biology, I guess podcasts, there is a way. So, lighthouse only needs your resume or even just your LinkedIn to tell you your options. And they respond to every single person who feels out their contact form. I really encourage you to reach out. You may be more eligible for a visa than you realize. Go to lighthousehq.com slash get started to learn more. All right, back to Arthur. I want to keep asking you more questions about the new degree of the situation, but before we keep deep diving, I want to step back and ask this question. I think the valence of things you've said so far has been look, they've been remarkably competent, even at the things which economists criticize the most for for the majority of the period of these schemes. The badger worked out quite well, for example, this local government financing through land sales on estimated future income and so forth. And then obviously we've been talking about Chinese industry and how that's been successful in many many key sectors. So I guess a big picture question I have is if that's true, look, I mean, there's still at like a fifth of America national income per capita, a third of similar countries in each stage like Japan, Taiwan, and South Korea. So how do we explain the relative poverty on a per capita basis in China? How do we explain? Obviously bad decisions like zero COVID. I guess I'm having trouble squaring the circle of like, they're making all these great calls. Yes. Why is it China more successful? They're not successful enough. I thought one of the problems in the world that we're facing today is that they're too successful at too many things and this is creating difficulties for other people. So yeah, that has come up from time to time. And during the period in the 90s and 2000s, whether you're growing it 10% a year, which is the fastest growth rate recorded by any economy in the history of mankind. And they were doing it just not for one or two years, but for 20 years in a row. People often say, well, there's always waste and there's too much data on enterprises and they could grow much faster if they were just more efficient. And it's like, really? Could they? They're already growing faster than anyone has grown before. Is it really the case that they could have grown a lot faster than they have? And maybe, but I doubt it. I doubt it. And the reason is I think there's what I would call kind of an efficiency fallacy, which is that economists who remember have all been basically each old global economists, macro economists have been trained in the United States, you know, since the end of World War II and particularly since the 1990s. Right. And so they view sort of the US in its developed state as the norm, rather than as the result of other processes. So it's like the way we operate now is the way we got here. And actually, that's not quite the case. The reason China was able to grow so fast for so long was that they were able to mobilize these huge swaths of resources, domestic savings, and throw them in a kind of uncoordinated way at a lot of problems. And there was a lot of waste along the way that was part of the equation. So if they had tried to be maximally efficient and said, no, no, no, we're not going to allow banks to lend unless they can prove that this project is definitely going to have an R I of X, they would have lend it a lot less. And they would probably have had a lot less growth because they were not willing simply to create that wall of money that would create broad based growth. And they might in fact have had substantially more inequality than they did because this wasteful method allowed them to spread out investment in a lot of areas which were geographically disadvantaged, which might not have done so well in a purely efficiency driven system. So I think we need to be careful about assuming that inefficiency is bad. I think inefficiency sometimes can be as long as it is a basically the result of a desire to be effective. That can be sort of a byproduct of a successful quote story. And I think that's that's basically my my account of China. Is it your quote in the book something like at a country of China scale what matters not as efficiency of using the resources but effectiveness of yeah, basically that's my basic thesis. And you know, I think they've shown that this works quite well. And I think that's also part of the answer to why well, why aren't they richer on a per capita basis? Well, there are 1.4 billion people. It is just gigantic. If you just think about the scale problem, right? Taiwan, Korea, South Korea, they got to whatever they are relative to US per capita GDP 60 70% something like that within a generation or two because Taiwan, they had 20 million people. South Korea, they had 40 45 million people to move that number of people and get them all working in. High wage industrial or service jobs in urban areas, you can do that in the course of a generation, right, 20, 25 years. I just think that's physically impossible to achieve that on the scale of the China has been operating on of 1.4 billion people. People look at the urban migration that they've done. It is completely unprecedented in the history of humanity, the speed at which they have converted people from rural residents into urban residents for many, many years. They were urbanizing the rate of 20 million people a year added to the urban population. I forget the precise calculation that I made, but in terms of, you know, they were effectively in terms of housing and urban infrastructure. They were building the equivalent of, I think, I calculated New York plus Philadelphia plus San Francisco every single year for 20 years, right. No one has ever done anything like this before. And so I think what this tells you, the lesson of this is that there's, there's an arithmetic problem there that even if you do this on this unprecedented scale and do it faster and bigger than anyone has done it before, if you're trying to move 1.4 billion people into an income of United States level, it just takes a really, really long time. Right. And now, of course, what's happened is because they have, I think, gone too far off the deep end of industrial policy and the supply side will solve all of our problems. Growth has slowed down quite a bit in the last few years. It's probably well below potential. I don't think that there's a lot of evidence that China's growth was below potential from, you know, 9, from 2000 until 2020, on average. I think there's a lot of evidence that it's below potential now. And so they are sacrificing the ability of the average Chinese person to do more rapid catch up with living standards of the West in order to achieve these industrial policy technology goals. Oh, question about it just to react really fast to some of the things you said. Obviously, there's places in China like Shanghai or Guangdong, which I have for capital incomes, approaching these East Asian neighbors that are really rich. And to the extent that that's possible through this high tech manufacturing. And to the extent that it's already a problem that other countries are complaining that China is doing too much high tech manufacturing. I guess it makes sense. Then like, well, how could you have literally 10X as many people? Right. Doing the same thing. I was going to ask you said the government has decided to prioritize this high tech development rather than the growth rate. And you said it as if there's a trade off. But naively, it seems like isn't high tech supposed to lead to growth. Right. Like what? What is the right. Why are we on this period of frontier with technological development and growth? Yeah. Well, and here you get to, I would say, a conceptual sort of fork in the road. I would say that in many respects, the communist leaders in China have a lot, you know, in common conceptually with the techno-opinus of Silicon Valley in there what I would call sort of technological fetishism. So let me see if I can I can break that down. Chinese leadership throughout the last 40 years, but even going back further has had this notion that, you know, technological upgrading is the key to wealth and power. Right. And this the fundamental idea here goes back to the 1840s when you had this great Chinese empire that had been sitting around for a thousand years doing great. They thought they were the best in the world. And then these upstarts from England come and crush them repeatedly, militarily and impose this, you know, very humiliating political settlement on them through the open wars. And so the basic analysis among the Chinese elites was, oh, okay, we fell behind technologically. And so therefore we must catch up technologically. This is the central thing that we need to do. And this was kind of recognized, you know, among some elites, but it ran into a lot of, encrusted political pressure in the late imperial Chinese regime. They didn't get very far. After the empire fell in 1911, you had a Republican government that basically if you look back at the things that they were saying and doing, they're pretty similar to what the Chinese Communist Party has been doing, saying and doing. They just did them somewhat less effectively. They were dealing with several wars and various other problems. But the basic insight was remain, remain the same that we need to catch up with the West technologically. This is the fundamental thing. It's just a question of how do we do this? And so what the current regime in China has, has been able to do is to take that basic idea and actualize it. They have been successful at this task of technological upgrading and catch up and so forth. So this is really central to the conception of Chinese elite thinking that the number one job of the government is to figure out how to mobilize the resources of Chinese society. So as to maximize technology acquisition creation and upgrading. Starting in the 1980s, that was a big part of the philosophy. But the other part of the philosophy is we just have to grow as fast as possible. And we are fairly agnostic as to where the growth comes from. And we realize that there are many different sources of growth for an investment, exports, construction, infrastructure. We're going to do all of these things. And basically the incentive structure that we will set up is just to tell local officials your job is to maximize GDP growth. And that will make all of these other things happen. If we tell local government officials your job is to maximize technology development, they'll do a lot of dumb stuff and waste a lot of money. That's not the right way to do it. Let's just GDP as the KPI the end. Right. And that turned out to be incredibly successful. Then Xi Jinping comes along in 2012, 2013 and says, well, OK, the problem with this is that is now going too far. It's led to a lot of corruption. It's led to a lot of inequality. It's led to a lot of local governments doing wasteful and duplicative things. And now we need to like hunker down and focus a little bit more on the really central task, which is this technology task. So less of growth at all costs. Basically, the implicit idea there is we've got this figure that growth will take care of itself. We have a growth machine in China. The resources government now need to be focused on specifically the technology question. So everything that he has done, particularly since about 2015, 2016 when he really started to see this come into focus has been let's worry less about the growth target and more about the technology targets. And particularly after Trump launched his trade war and the Biden administration followed that up with a lot of controls on exports of technology to China, I think the focus got intense because they were saying, oh, the US really wants to prohibit constrained our technological rise. They kind of have the ability to do so. And so therefore we have to double down on our efforts to replicate all of these core technologies so that we're not reliant on the US or its allies anymore. And we just have to go full tilt on technology at all costs. So that was that was kind of an accelerant of of this tendency. But then there is also there is kind of a macro economic theory. So if you go back and read some of the statements that they put out in the late 20 teens about their vision of the future, basically they said all of these technological developments by which they meant investments in they didn't mean Ali Baba and Tencent and all of these great internet companies. They meant physical technology, semiconductors, new material, green energy, industrial robots, all this kind of stuff. Essentially their view is this is going to be the productivity engine of the future. And so growth and you know growth in the overall economy and incomes, it's all going to be driven by these technological investments. And I think that is essentially what they sincerely believe. Right. And I think there are some problems with that, which is that you know the vast majority of people in an economy do not work in those sectors. Right. So you can get very, very good at making semiconductors industrial robots and whatnot. And the people who work in those industries do extremely well. But that is a tiny, tiny fraction of the totality of the population. And how do you have spillovers that enable everyone in the economy regardless of how remote they are from this you know engine room of the high tech sector to enjoy gains income. Right. And the answer in the United States is to historically has been we're just going to have this great consumer economy right we are essentially going to be demands driven. And so consumers will tell us what they want and companies will rise to you know make what they want which is increasingly not stuff but services experiences and so forth. And we will create a financial system that produces very good financial rewards for the companies for the people that produce these kinds of services. And then you generate huge amounts of actually very high paid. You know employment in the services economy and I think the the Achilles heel of any sort of industrial policy driven growth model like China but you can see variance of this basically throughout East Asia is they're very materials they're convinced that it's only really the physical stuff that matters. So you get really good at making the physical stuff that will somehow magically spill over into the rest of the economy and I think the evidence that we have is that that actually doesn't work that much that most of the demand in a modern industrial economy the really high wage high income economies comes from intangible services. And so there's a more complicated interaction between this high tech core and wider economic growth and I don't see in China how they set up the linkage between all these great high tech industries that they have and the 90 or so percent of the economy which is doing something else. I guess I still don't understand so point taken that maybe in the short run these other sectors don't generate as much growth as just building or housing or something but by that same token they don't take that much capital in like the scheme of the national economy right to sustain so if China wants to do $100 billion fund for semiconductors that shouldn't detract from it's a bit like I should understand why the macro growth number has to go down for it to be able to do that 100 billion semi-conductors. Well it doesn't have to but the way that they have in fact executed this tends to lead in that direction and so here's why so at the same time that they have been doubling down on industrial policy they have also been much more tightly regulating their service sectors so few examples the famous one is that they woke up in November of 2020 realized that all of Bob is financial. The financial subsidiary was about to do this gigantic IPO the premise of which was the Chinese should build a financial system that resembled that of the United States in 2005 and that this was a really smart idea and they said oh actually that's a really dumb idea because look what that led to the US we don't want to your utilization we do not want this like financial risk generation that that and financial is trying to talk about we really need to correct down on these guys so they did. Also simultaneously concerned with a lot of other things that the internet platforms were up to and so there was this broad based regulation of the internet sector which weirdly for about 20 years had operated in a complete free for all land of almost no regulation whatsoever except for political censorship but pretty much anything else you wanted to do you could do it with very little governor interference it was a strange exception to the sort of the world. So they were all of the internet companies and they were all of the internet companies and they were all of the internet companies and basically told them there are things that you can do that are fine and there are things that you cannot do and there are a lot of business models that you might be interested in doing such as Fintech such as telehealth such as kind of wider social media applications that you may not do because we think it could be a lot of things that you can do. So they created so much financial risk we think it creates so much social stability risk we think it creates so much political risk for us the communist party and so a lot of the avenues of growth for the internet companies were shut down so that was they still did okay there's still very big companies I think there's share prices you know fell way more than was justified by the actual loss and revenue that's starting to correct. Allie Boba Tencent there's still great companies they're figuring it out but they were severely constrained they were much much more tightly regulated you look at the financial sector generally it was significantly deregulated from about 2008 to about 2017 with some bad consequences increased financial risk shadow banking lots of bad stuff but also lots of good stuff private companies which were essentially shut out of loan finance got the ability to finance themselves to debt in the way that they had not been able to previously you had a lot of new financial services going to households and basically the government said no this is a little bit too dangerous we're going to re-regulate it and now most financial activity in China has been constricted back into a small number of basically state bank so severe re-regulation of the financial sector there was a lot of talk about healthcare sector opening that up to much more to private entrepreneurship that again has been reigned in so you can go down the list and there has been a massive re-regulation of the service sector which limits the opportunities for profitable expansion by companies limits the opportunities for entrepreneurship and limits the opportunities for employment. The examples you mentioned all seem like that the potential growth was constrained not because it was cutting off against high tech development in other more physical fields but because it was a threat to political power or it has perceived social stability so to the extent that growth has gone down because of all these actions not to the extent it has gone down because these actions and it doesn't seem like it's happened because they needed that to happen in order to get an opportunity to finance themselves. It's not just a political choice. This is what happens if you say technological development particularly in hardware will solve all of our problems it will generate all this growth and so therefore we don't need this service sector. We have a real life experiment and what happens if you do that and what happens if you do that is you get a lot of progress in the technological sectors and you get basically a persistent shortage of aggregate demand which means that even the people who are making all this great technology stuff don't have any pricing powers they have to keep lowering their prices so you get deflation when you get deflation unless employment growth people say at the household level people aren't hiring so I guess I need to save more and spend less because my income is not going to go up and you create the risk of this deflationary spiral which they're sort of on the edge of right now. I think this is something again this gets back to the sort of like the techno optimist view of things is that if you if you have this very narrow view of the economy is purely the expression of the emanation from this technological core you're missing a lot of stuff right and you will basically take yourself into a blind alley. If you think that that is going to solve all your problems and the Chinese government in the last few months I think has begun to recognize this and say oh actually we need to have some kind of a demand strategy this is very evident on their top level statements and the problem is they've been working for 45 years to build this magnificent machine of investment and industry and manufacturing and they're very very good at it. And they have basically devoted no time in the last 45 years to figuring out how to create a demand machine so they're just at the very early stages of figuring out that part of the problem and there's another problem with this focus on specific parts of technology development which is that if you in any field you understand well enough you realize sort of how contingent and random the steps right to laying up to what we now consider to be this. So it's sort of like self contained high tech thing is the field I know better than others is AI and just there's so many weird things right that like people wanted to play video games and so we had decades of progress in making these graphics processing units right which contributed to a development or people were just like posting on Reddit on Twitter and so forth and that that fossil fuel of data has been powering these AI models and so. The idea that you could just like set in 2000 we want to make progress towards a GI and somehow that would have like let somewhere as opposed to right what actually ended up happening yeah I think you can scale that analogy up to China just it's total economy a lot of the stuff that I've been talking about about how they got here I mean the thing you want to be careful about is it was not this is not the result of some carefully crafted master plan that the new along it was a lot of grouping and a lot of random stuff. They did one thing for one reason and another thing for another reason and then through this kind of random process it all sort of coalesced in the end but that was not you know the amount of intelligent design behind that was I think actually quite low they got a few sort of big directional things I think correct and they stuck with them that's where I would give policy credit and they were willing to adapt when they were able to do that. Things were obviously not working and and cut things off and and you know adjust with pretty high frequency but a lot of it was essentially a random walk where a lot of things that were enabled then sort of started to interact with each other in the way that you've talked about AI and then they create these other results which you know could not have been pre-plant. Another thing to consider when discussing the virtue of such a system is you can't just look at the results over the course of 20 years or 30 years and say well it's going to pick the key technologies over this period. Right. Therefore this is this is most preferable it's somewhat similar to like looking at one successful dictator and say like because they made the right calls dictatorship is the right model. I mean there haven't many other countries which like I don't actually don't know that much about like what Japan was doing in the 40s to 70s but I assume they like a needy or whatever made some right calls about which electronics and cars and so forth are important but the judge like how plausible is it that this level of competence and foresight and luck or whatever mixture there and will continue into AI what happens after that whatever is required as an input into that. Yeah I mean I guess speaking of which let me ask you about that well actually can I just talk either because there are a couple things that you touched on there that I think are really interesting that I just like to put on a little bit more. So you know past results from no guarantee of future returns right so just because you didn't before does mean you can keep doing it you know we're seeing that now in the US a few years ago I would have said I had very high confidence that the US will be able to retain the basic political system and structure is head for a really long time. And that's one of its you know enduring strengths that that infrastructure remains I'm much less confident about that. You know similarly in China I think you have this problem that they've had a succession of top leaders since non show pings several and with very different styles and sort of power bases and so forth and they've managed to succeed through you know a range of these things so that gives you more confidence that they're probably more likely to do it right in future than not but you know I'm not sure if you can do that. You know a lot of concerns about that and Xi Jinping is basically declared himself present for life. We haven't been in that situation in China for a long time last time we had that it did not end well and the sort of the there's always been a trade off between growth and control and China this is the kind of the central dilemma that the Communist Party said we want as much growth as possible but we also want to maintain a pretty high level of control. And the that pendulum has swung much more towards the control side of the equation last few years and growth is slowing right so a lot of problems however I would make a couple of points one is China has been successful in its industrial policy less because they picked the right industries and more because they were very adept at building the right enabling infrastructure. And I would point to two things in particular one was a program that they had starting in the 1990s which in English has the very ungainly name of informatization so it translates to Chinese term since he why which just means informatization right taking information technology is the embedded term here and putting it everywhere in society. So they were early adopters of the it revolution including the internet and if you think back to the discourse around the internet in the late in the 1990s everyone was saying the internet is the death now of authoritarian regimes because this empowers everyone to have information information control is no longer possible social control is no longer possible. You know would that that were true right the Chinese government very very early said no that is wrong we think that the internet can be an instrument that we can use to number one promote technological development at a high speed in China and number two enhance our control of society. And I think they have been proved absolutely correct in that bet on both counts clearly they're drive to network the entire society which they started to invest in very very early initially just through ordinary fixed line telecoms networks but then they were very early in mobile and then getting government network systems that communicated across the whole country the invested huge amounts in that and it's been I think very beneficial to the rise of the world. Of all kinds of things and it's why basically they were able to create an entire internet of their own with its own companies that doesn't have the participation of the US global companies and is on its own terms basically just as successful. But it was also what they recognized is if everyone's on the internet and we have people watching the internet then we know what everyone is thinking all the time we can see that and this is the this is the the holy grail of Chinese leadership sits the second century BC right we sit on top this vast empire it's great we have all this territory all of this wealth is flowing in and we have no idea what people are thinking or doing. Far away this is be deviled every Chinese administration for thousands of years and even into the 1990s it was an authoritarian system is very fragmented and it was a very very hard for the central government to really have any idea what was going on. And now we have a penopticon because everyone is online and if we control the online universe then we see everything and then we're pretty confident that we can keep the door discourse under control and they won that bet right. So the comparable move that they're making today which I think is severely underappreciated is that they believe in the power of electrification. So electricity has been around for a long time but still in most countries it only accounts for about 15 to 20% of the total final consumption of energy. So it is still actually a minor player in the global energy equations by having been around for 150 years and being very critical in a lot of applications. China very early on recognized that they needed a lot more electric power. The original reason was very prosaic they had a lot of power shortages in the early 2000s that were making it hard for their factories to run and they said oh we got to like build a lot more generating capacity most of it fueled by coal just so we can keep our factories running. That was the first thing. And then they started to think about it a little bit more and they started to say hmm actually what do we want. Well we know we're failing as we talked about earlier we know we're failing in this drive to make cars with international combustion engines and it looks like we're never going to be able to crack that nut and have our own Toyota or General Motors. But no one's making electric cars maybe we can be the first to do electric cars right. So they said we got to do that then they said oh we need to enhance our domestic transport infrastructure wouldn't be great if we had a giant high speed rail network just like Japan except you know we're 20 times larger than Japan so it has to be 20 times as big. So let's do that and by the way this is all going to be electrified. So they created a couple of core hub industries the premise for which was you need gigantic quantities of electricity to get these things working right if everyone has an electric car and everyone's charging their battery huge draw right if everyone is writing on electric trains instead of on planes huge draw electricity so we need to have a much more comprehensive idea about what our electricity grid is going to look like. To support these industries that we want for other reasons and then well where do we want this electricity come from well coal yeah we have a lot of coal but it's really dirty it's a climate problem it's a very severe domestic air pollution problems is really dirty so from an energy security and pollution standpoint we're probably better off doing renewables because any other source of fuel for thermal power plants we're going to have to import we don't have enough natural gas right we can build nuclear energy. We can build nuclear but that's hard to scale and we don't have enough uranium we build a renewable powered domestic electricity grid we are self sufficient forever because you don't have to import the sun or the wind it's just there. You can see how these things begin to build on one another it was not again it's not that they had the intelligent design plan in the year 2000 is just sort of all these things came together and the result is today China has generating capacity that is double more than double that of the United States. There renewables generation capacity alone is as big as the entire generation capacity of the United States electricity as a whole is now about 30% of China's total energy consumption it's going up like this it's rising very rapidly everyone else is increasing their electricity consumption very very marginally. And now you see in things like AI what is one of the big constraints on AI development at scale it is essentially the power that you need to power these data centers who is best place in the world to do this at home China right and they have also concluded that you know AI aside that having cheap abundant electricity is really central to all of the major growth industries of the 21st century so they are now determined I think on the strategic. So you can see the big basis to have an electricity system that just produces as much power as humanly possible from whatever fuel source you can find. To interconnect this by a grid as efficiently as you can so their leaders in ultra high voltage distribution technology. So we will be able to keep our electricity prices so low that that will be make it very difficult for anywhere else anywhere else in the world to compete with our manufacturing with our AI with our whatever anything that electricity goes into we will have this competitive advantage. And so they've been very and I think they're basically right about that and the point here is that if you're if you're able to get a few of these sort of enabling. All purpose technology decisions right earlier and then scale them up then a lot of good things can happen is a result of that regardless of how effective you are picking winners sector by sector and industrial policy is interesting what what is the story in which China doesn't win AI. Because in terms of talent of AI researchers themselves it's a big country with lots of smart people that will be there we've already seen examples with high flyer and deep seek where they can come close to the frontier. In terms of chips eventually smake will be able to produce the kinds of 800 equivalent that the five and an enemy process that he has to produce I don't know how many years away it is and you know expert controls might have still been net good but this is not something that will not happen within the next five 10 years. And then it's a matter of scaling scaling production of the chip scaling energy scaling maybe people and data collection right and what is China good at it scaling right and I think the numbers on energy production are just like absolutely staggering yes what is the time interval in which China adds a you America sized amount of power generation it's like well they add basically a France or UK on average every year. It's rapidly that forward and why that's important is so far we've been focused especially on training of AI models right when these models start becoming super economically productive basically by the point at which they are a human level right the more important question will be how many can you deploy right why is the reason China is such a powerful country America is a powerful country a big part of the reason is we just have more people yes that's why China could take over Taiwan is just like it has a billion people in Taiwan has on the order of what 20 20 23. So yeah so now you just have like more a eyes right more a people if you have more power which is ultimately what's upstream. Yeah. Yes. Okay anyways those all just preface for asking in 2035 what is the story of how China doesn't absolutely dominate AI it's a good question and we're we're verging a little bit beyond my sort of realm of competence here because I don't pretend to understand AI very well. I'm still very unclear as to economically where all the benefit accrues right and so I guess my theory if I if I abstract away from AI and just think about this okay this is a situation where you've got a new technology it's you know entering society what is like the innovation cycle it's going to drive it so I'm pretty partial to theories of innovation like the world. The one that was propounded by a guy called tomorrow but a at I think it's Michigan state who wrote a book number years ago called the Venture some economy and what he stresses there is sort of like the feedback loop between consumer demand and what producers are doing and his view is that we focus a lot too much we focused too much on what the producers are doing and not enough on what the what the consumers are doing. What the consumers are driving right and I think that's a pretty good insight generally I think it helps explain a lot of why the U.S. is maintained its position such a dynamic economy even though a lot of we've sort of abandoned a lot of the physical processes that underlie it. And so my question is okay economically when we say AI what is what's the most important part of it is it the large language models I think the consensus is no that's just like the substrate and what really matters is the applications specific applications that get built on top of that and that's where most of the economic benefit is going to accrue right if that idea is correct. Then the question you want to ask yourself is what economic system offers the most fertile ground for people figuring out how to use AI in specific zones and there I would give the U.S. a fairly strong edge over China because China has become more self enclosed they have become more obsessed with self sufficiency they've made it very very difficult for a lot of people. So they have to have other people to operate in China and it's creating some difficulties in people operating outside of China so they have this walled garden of Chinese people and whatever they do that creates applications. However the big U.S. or Western AI operators have they have the entire rest of the world to play with and that's a much bigger universe where I would I would sort of rate the likelihood that you get interesting applications higher outside the Chinese walled garden that that would be my so if you want that if you want the case for why does China not dominate I think that would something like that would be the reason why. I guess I just had on Victor she said that the Chinese government you were reluctant to let the development go full speed because of the destabilizing effects it might have on the political system or the inability potentially to control it yeah what's your sense on what will happen as you can work it I'm looking valuable a focal point in discussions about technological development and so forth. I have respect for Victor and he I think has a very good grasp of the Chinese sort of bureaucratic mindset and how political calculations get many and that's his territory more than mine so I'm very respectable of that view I would however tend to think that actually the Chinese are going to be pretty in favor of high speed AI development. And the reason is essentially the same reason that I was talking about earlier about information electrification this is essentially a a basic enabling technology that is useful for all of the things that can flow from it. And I guess my hunch would be that they would make the same bet with AI that they made with the internet back in the 90s the internet they said yeah this technology could be dangerous it could be out of our control but we think actually it's going to be really beneficial and that we can control it. And that bet paid off for them very very well and I think my my hunch is that they will look at AI as a similar sort of thing yes it's possible that this could sort of get out of our control but we think unbalanced this is really important technology it's going to enable out of other things and we'll probably be able to figure out how to control it because our control systems are so good. It is interesting because if you look at the sort of the big development in Chinese AI recently was deep seek right deep seek was not the result of some state program it was the result of basically a quant hedge fund guy and hung Joe sitting around and saying oh I could actually build a pretty good you know LL model you know flowing out of my you know quant activities let's give it a go see see how it happens. And and it work great for me and then and the reports that I have seen suggest that this created a certain amount of disquiet in Beijing they said well where did this guy come from and why is this why is he not coming out of the official plan so. So so there is some risk I think that they would be a little bit nervous about freelancing on this but on the whole I think they'll see this is another basic enabling technology that they should promote and figure out how to control over time ironically this is the one place I mean to these in the China's advantages lie in its ability like institutions were centralization is important right they can do it ironically this might be a case where central visualization might be helpful and they might not do it because right there are these tremendous economies of scale in the I training and you you know you have to keep increasing the the training cost by you know 4x every single year right and especially given that the availability of these advanced ships is lower in China it would be even more helpful to have one person who can use them all for training. This may be the most situation where would it would make more sense for the government to say Huawei and by done to get all your chips to I think we can say with high confidence that that's not going to happen that they're just like as powerful as the Chinese government is they do not have the ability to force everyone into one room for this right so Huawei's got its own thing going by dances can have its own thing going show me is going to have its own thing going all of these have sufficiently large revenue. And then we can move to a new streams and access to capital that they can move independently and will be able to leverage their you know their connections within the system both at the central level and the local government level where they get a lot of their support to do their own thing so yeah it will be yeah you will not have a national monopoly solution to this that that almost never occurs in China interesting that actually that that's a significant statement and that's not going to be a lot of the same thing going on in the world. Statement and maybe updates me downwards on the probability of China winning an AI I think one of their key advantages because they think the fragmentation becomes an obstacle yeah especially given the availability of computer China right so the ability to concentrate your limited resources in one thing instead of scattered around you know I think that's a fair point right and then so that then comes back to how how fast can they solve the chip problem domestically yeah. Because if they can solve that really fast than that can shrink as way I think one thing that will be important as this is happening is to have something that is equivalent to the right telephone right I do buy some of the crazy or scary stories about what could happen with the eye and not necessarily because like you know God takes over but more so just like it's happened many times in human history that some more coordinated group as it managed to do some sort of cool right. So the take over control so the kind of thing courtes did or bizarre or did and I think a key way that can be prevented or we can reduce the risk of that is different human groups should be in like tight contact with each other right and have the same kind of mechanism to the vaccination creates with diseases so the key advantage that the Spanish had over the new world empires right was that the Spanish knew how each previous conquest had gone. Right but the ink is in the aspects to know about you know what strategies are used how horses work right how steel works so how that translates here is I think there might be some crazy things is a strive especially we have this like bifurcated world which I think is actually very valuable from an alignment and safety perspective because you have this independent experiment right or independent lineage. If if they're a trust to do something crazy I think it's like very important that they feel the big and tell us and yes exact opposite long preamble to ask a question of how do we set up that kind of high trust or yes pre requisite understanding on these kinds of issues such that this kind of that is a terrific question I think that really gets to the heart of a lot of stuff. And I know I don't have a great answer to that right because fundamentally what you're saying is that there needs to be you know a communication system a network of interactions between two highly competitive zones the US and China basically where you know they they have to be able to operate with some degree of trust right and the I think the problem that we face in trying to analyze this is a lot of the analogies that you might reach for you know break down at some point so you brought up the red telephone which basically is a reference to the line of communication with the US and so union had during the Cold War where the threat that you were trying to vert was nuclear holocaust basically. You know and in some ways I think that's that's an apt analogy and we kind of need to think broadly long those terms but the specific problem that we were dealing with there with these very self contained systems that were clearly under highly centralized control by a couple of people and so having that one to one line of communication was was an effective response to that particular problem with AI it's not a problem. Much more diffuse much more decentralized much more unpredictable what the problems could be and you know it's it's kind of easy I think to create easy we say in retrospect it was hard at the time but it was a sort of if you will a maybe a a two or three dimensional process to come up with game theory to enable us to manage the nuclear balance of terror right. So I don't want to minimize Thomas shelling's achievement was it was great but but it was like a two or three dimensional problem I think with AI you have more like a more than three dimensional problem so it is consequently more difficult to figure out how do you how do you create a game theory solution to this that is kind of stable right I think what you can say to minimum right now is I'm. There are ways in which the US China relationship today resembles that of the United States and the Soviet Union in the 1950s I before the Cuban Missile Crisis right now I don't want to exaggerate this too much but the the sort of diminution in exchange in communication over the last six or seven years is really alarming so give a simple example on this when Trump came into office. This is the first time 2017 he inherited structure where there were approximately 100 working level dialogues between US government and Chinese government officials plus all of this investment and private sector stuff that was going on but just at the formal level there were over 100 dialogues he got rid of all of them 100% right and he then replaced them with one which was the most important thing that was going on. The trade talks that he had this first term that was the only basically mechanism we had of communication did this create a specific problem it did so if you look at the early stages of COVID right back when SARS came out in 2003 there were staff members of the United States Centers for Disease Control embedded in the Chinese Centers for Disease Control or their equivalent organization. And that that relationship in fact grew significantly in part because of SARS over subsequent years and that was a very very useful channel of getting information out it was not perfect had no plenty of problems but the absence of that channel I think was really catastrophic in the early days of COVID where we literally had no way of understanding what was going on within the Chinese system there was no back channel that enabled us to get even a little bit of a head start on what was going on and I think that had very very dire consequences you can probably trace many many many deaths and a lot of social chaos to the inability of the U.S. and China to communicate at that critical moment right so we have essentially dismantled the whole structure of communication the Biden administration basically took the same view they they were going to take the same view. took the same view. They introduced a few more things. So there's a few more, there were a few more communication channels that they handed off to Trump that I think have not been made use of. So we're back to essentially zero except for the trade. And that is a very very dangerous situation to be in with regard to global public health, any kind of sort of global coordination, whether it be on macroeconomics or climate effort or whatever, and on these issues like AI, right? I think that's a really bad place to be. So we're starting at a, I think, a rather dangerous position. I think it should be a priority to figure out how we can get there. And it's very hard to see how we get there given the political environment, frankly, in both countries. So in the United States, you have this narrative that China is this bad actor. They have an illegitimate government. They are a systemic rival. We basically have to contain, constrain, control them. And any kind of interaction with them is in and of itself dangerous. So you have people in Congress saying, I don't want to go to China. There's no point in going to China. A, because I'll pay a political price for it. If I go there, I will be tired as someone who went to China and therefore is tainted. And what can I possibly learn? I already know what I need to know, right? So you have a deliberate effort, I think, with the United States to reduce the channel of information that we have with China and direct experience, which is very bad. And, you know, I think one of the bad outcomes of COVID in China was that they kind of locked themselves off from the rest of the world for almost three years. They got really obsessed by this self-sufficiency industrial policy, you know, complex. You know, the Chinese system has always had a lot of difficulty communicating with the rest of the world. This has been persistent for many decades and centuries. And so this gave them a great excuse to just like not do the thing that made them feel very uncomfortable, which is like engage in communication with the rest of the world. And they concluded it's kind of okay. And so they also retreated into a very sort of paranoid narrative about what the US is up to, which is to a significant degree justified, but not entirely. And I think lost sight of the value of really robust communications alliance with the rest of the world. So both sides are entrenched in very suspicious self-reinforcing narratives about the other, which makes it incredibly difficult to forge a better communication system. And I have to say, you know, I'm fairly critical both of the Biden administration and the Trump administration.